- THIS SEGMENT OF
THE VIDEO JOURNAL OF EDUCATION
IS "BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS:
INTRODUCTION."
AS A PROFESSIONAL EDUCATOR,
YOU MAY COME ACROSS
EXTRAORDINARY CIRCUMSTANCES
IN YOUR DAY-TO-DAY INTERACTIONS
WITH STUDENTS.
THE INFORMATION
IN THIS PROGRAM
IS DESIGNED TO INFORM
AND EDUCATE YOU
SHOULD YOU FIND YOURSELF
IN SUCH A SITUATION.
IN THIS PROGRAM,
WE WILL BE COVERING
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS,
WHAT THEY ARE,
AND WHERE THEY ARE FOUND.
IN SEGMENT TWO,
WE WILL REVIEW OSHA'S
BLOODBORNE PATHOGEN STANDARD.
SEGMENT THREE WILL OUTLINE
HOW TO AVOID EXPOSURE.
AND IN THE FINAL SEGMENT
OF THIS PROGRAM,
WE WILL DISCUSS WHAT TO EXPECT
IF YOU ARE EXPOSED
AND ARRANGING FOLLOW-UP.
LET'S BEGIN
WITH A DEFINITION OF TERMS.
ACCORDING TO
THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY
AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION,
OR OSHA,
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS
CAN BE DEFINED AS...
HIV IS A VIRUS
THAT LEADS TO AIDS,
OR ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY
SYNDROME.
HIV-INFECTED PERSONS
MAY HAVE NO SYMPTOMS
OR MAY HAVE SYMPTOMS
SUCH AS SWOLLEN LYMPH NODES,
FATIGUE, WEIGHT LOSS,
DIARRHEA, PERSISTENT DRY COUGH,
AND FEVER.
MANY HIV-INFECTED INDIVIDUALS
DO NOT SHOW THESE SYMPTOMS
FOR MANY YEARS.
HBV AND HCV
ARE LIVER DISEASES,
AND SYMPTOMS RANGE
FROM MILD ILLNESS
TO SERIOUS,
LONG-TERM ILLNESS,
WHICH COULD LEAD TO
LIVER DISEASE OR LIVER CANCER.
MORE ABOUT THESE DISEASES
CAN BE FOUND AT CDC.GOV.
THOUGH BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS
ARE RARE,
PEOPLE EXPOSED
TO THESE PATHOGENS
RISK SERIOUS ILLNESS
OR DEATH.
TRANSMISSION OF
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CAN OCCUR
WHEN DEALING WITH HUMAN BLOOD
AND OTHER POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS
MATERIALS, OR OPIMs.
THESE OPIMs INCLUDE:
BLOOD PRODUCTS,
SUCH AS PLASMA OR SERUM;
SEMEN;
VAGINAL SECRETIONS;
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID;
PLEURAL FLUID,
OR LUNG FLUID;
SYNOVIAL FLUID,
OR FLUID FROM YOUR JOINTS;
AMNIOTIC FLUID,
OR UTERINE FLUID;
PERITONEAL FLUID,
OR THE FLUID THAT FILLS
YOUR BODY CAVITY;
ANY BODY FLUID THAT IS VISIBLY
CONTAMINATED WITH BLOOD;
ANY BODY FLUID THAT
IS NOT EASILY DISTINGUISHED.
ANY MATERIALS
FROM THE HUMAN BODY,
SUCH AS ORGANS AND FLUIDS,
CAN ALL BE
POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS,
AND PRECAUTIONS MUST BE TAKEN
IN CIRCUMSTANCES
WHERE YOU MAY ENCOUNTER
SUCH MATERIAL.
PRECAUTIONS SHOULD BE TAKEN
WHEN WORKING WITH
ALL ANIMAL BODY MATERIALS
AS WELL.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS
ARE RECOMMENDED
WHEN DEALING WITH ANY OPIMs.
ACCORDING TO OSHA,
THE CONCEPT OF
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS IS THAT...
IN OTHER WORDS, TREATING
ANY POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FLUID
AS IF IT WAS INFECTED.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS
ARE ACHIEVED
BY USING GLOVES,
PARTICULARLY WHEN DEALING
WITH THESE TYPES OF POTENTIALLY
INFECTIOUS MATERIALS.
GOWNS AND PROTECTIVE EYEWEAR
SHOULD ALSO BE USED
WHEN POSSIBLE.
THIS WILL BE COVERED
IN GREATER DEPTH
IN SEGMENT THREE,
"AVOIDING EXPOSURE."
TRANSMISSION OCCURS
IF INFECTIOUS BLOOD OR OPIM
IS INTRODUCED
INTO THE BLOODSTREAM.
THIS COULD HAPPEN
THROUGH PARENTERAL EXPOSURE,
WHICH IS A BREAK IN THE SKIN,
SUCH AS THROUGH A CUT
OR INJURY,
OR A CUT OR STICK
BY CONTAMINATED MATERIAL,
SUCH AS A NEEDLE
OR GLASS.
TRANSMISSION MAY ALSO OCCUR
THROUGH MUCOUS MEMBRANE
EXPOSURE,
SUCH AS THROUGH
THE EYE, NOSE, OR MOUTH,
OR THROUGH SEXUAL CONTACT
AND FROM AN INFECTED WOMAN
TO HER NEWBORN CHILD.
BODY FLUIDS NOT ANTICIPATED
TO BE INFECTED
WITH BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS
INCLUDE:
IF BLOOD IS VISIBLE,
THESE FLUIDS SHOULD BE TREATED
AS INFECTIOUS.
HOWEVER, ALL THESE SECRETIONS
MAY BE POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS
FOR OTHER VIRAL OR BACTERIAL
INFECTIOUS MATERIALS,
AND GENERAL HYGIENE PRACTICES
ARE HIGHLY RECOMMENDED
IF CONTACT WITH THESE MATERIALS
IS LIKELY.
AS A PROFESSIONAL EDUCATOR,
YOU MAY RARELY IF EVER
COME IN CONTACT
WITH SOME OF THESE MATERIALS.
IT IS, HOWEVER,
IN YOUR BEST INTEREST
TO ACT RESPONSIBLY
AND BE INFORMED.
THIS HAS BEEN A BRIEF REVIEW
OF WHAT
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS ARE
AND WHERE THEY CAN BE FOUND.
MORE INFORMATION
ON THESE SUBJECTS CAN BE FOUND
ON THE OSHA WEBSITE,
OSHA.GOV,
AND IN THE NEXT SEGMENTS
OF THIS PROGRAM.
THE INFORMATION
IN THE NEXT SEGMENTS
WILL EXPLAIN THE OSHA STANDARDS,
HOW TO AVOID EXPOSURE,
AND WHAT TO DO
IN THE EVENT OF EXPOSURE.
THIS CONCLUDES SEGMENT ONE,
"BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS."